# Chapter Six: Of The Fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment Thereof

## SECTION  1:
> OUR  first  parents  being  seduced  by  the  subtlety  and temptation  of  Satan,  sinned  in  eating  the  forbidden  fruit.  (1)  This their sin God was pleased, according to his wise and holy counsel, to permit, having purposed to order it to his own glory. (2)
>
> (1) Gen. 3:13; 2 Cor. 11:3. (2) Rom. 11:32.

God  having  brought  the  souls  of  Adam  and  Eve  into  being  by immediate creation holy, and with sufficient knowledge as to his will, capable of obedience yet fallible, this section proceeds to teach:

- 1. Our first parents sinned.
- 2. The particular sin they committed was their eating the forbidden fruit.

It  appears  to  be  God's  general  plan,  and  one  eminently  wise  and righteous,  to  introduce  all  the  newly-created  subjects  of  moral government into a state of probation for a time, in which he makes their  permanent  character  and  destiny  depend  upon  their  own action. He creates them holy, yet capable of falling. In this state he subjects them to a moral test for a time. If they stand the test, the reward  is  that  their  moral  characters  are  confirmed  and  rendered infallible,  and  they  are  introduced  into  an  inalienable  blessedness forever. If they fail, they are judicially excluded from God's favor and communion  forever,  and  hence  morally  and  eternally  dead.  This certainly has been his method of dealing with newly-created angels and men. In the case of mankind the specific test to which our first parents were subjected was their abstaining from eating of the fruit of a single tree. As this was a matter in itself morally indifferent, it was admirably adapted to be a test of their implicit allegiance to God, of their absolute faith and submission.

The dreadful sin committed by Adam and Eve seems to hvae been twofold. Their unbelief induced them to doubt the wisdom of God's prohibition  and  the  certainty  of  the  divine  threatening;  and  their disobedience to God's will manifested their sin of unbelief. In respect to the origin of sin in this world, there are two questions which men constantly ask, and which it is impossible to answer:

### A
How could sinful desires or volitions originate in the soul of moral agents  created  holy like Adam  and  Eve?  Men  exercise  choice according to their prevailing desires and affections. If these are holy, their  wills  are  holy.  And  the  character  of  their  prevailing  affections and desires is determined by the moral state of their souls. If their souls  are  holy,  these  are  holy;  if  their  souls  are  sinful,  these  are sinful.  Christ  says,  "A  good  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  the heart,  bringeth  forth  good  things;  and  an  evil  man,  out  of  the  evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things." "Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt." (Matt. 12:33,35.) But Adam's heart had been created holy; how then could his action be sinful?

All our experience conspires to make the question more difficult. The sinful souls of fallen men never can give birth to holy volitions until they are regenerated by divine grace. The holy spirits of angels and glorified  men  in  heaven  are  forever  removed  from  all  liability  to sinful affections or actions. In both these cases the stream continues as the fountain.

Now, although we cannot explain precisely  the  origin  of  sin  in  the holy  soul  of  Adam,  it  is  plain  that  the  difficulty  lies  only  in  our ignorance. We have none of us experienced the same conditions of free  agency as those which give character to the case of Adam. We have always been under the bondage of corruption, except insofar as we are momentarily assisted  against  nature  by  supernatural  grace. Now,  in  order  that  a  volition  shall  be  holy,  it  must  spring  from  a positively holy affection or disposition; and as these are not native to our  hearts,  we  cannot  exercise  holy  volitions  without  grace.  But Adam was in a state of probation, holy yet fallible. Saints and angels are holy and infallible, yet their infallibility is not essential to their natures,  but  is  a  superadded  divine  grace  sustained  by  the  direct power of God. While holiness must always be positive, rooting itself in  divine  love,  it  is  plain  that  sin  may  originate  in  defect;  not  in positive  alienation,  but  in  want  of  watchfulness-in  the  temporary ascendancy  of  the  natural  and  innocent  appetites  of  the  body  or constitutional  tendencies  of  the  soul  over  the  higher  powers  of conscience.

The external influences and the subjective motives which prompted our  first  parents  to  this  dreadful  sin  did  not  in  the  first  instance imply  sin  in  them,  but  became  the  occasion  of  sin  upon  being allowed to occupy their minds and to sway their wills in despite of the divine prohibition. The external influences and motives combined  a  natural  appetite  for  the  attractive  fruit  with  a  natural desire  for  knowledge.  But  most  importantly,  they  were  seduced  by the temptation of Satan, about whose fall little is known, and unto whom the true origin of sin is to be referred.

### B.
The  other  element  of  mystery  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  sin relates to the permission of God. This section affirms, 4. That this sin was permissively embraced in the eternal purpose of God.

About  the  facts  of  the  case  there  can  be  no  doubt.  (1)  God  did certainly  foreknow  that  if  such  a  being  as  Adam  was  put  in  such conditions as he was, he would sin as he sinned. Yet, in spite of this certain knowledge, God created that very being and put him in those very conditions; and having determined to overrule the sin for good, he sovereignly decreed not to intervene to prevent, and so he made it certainly  future.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  God  did  neither  cause  nor approve  Adam's  sin.  He  forbade  it,  and  presented  motives  which should  have  deterred  from  it.  He  created  Adam  holy  and  fully capable of obedience, and with sufficient knowledge of his duty, and then left him alone to his trial. If it be asked why God, who abhors sin, and who benevolently desires the excellence and happiness of his creatures, should sovereignly determine to permit such a fountain of pollution,  degradation,  and  misery  to  be  opened,  we  can  only  say, with profound reverence, "Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight."

- 5. That God from the beginning designed to order the sin of Adam to his  own  glory  is  included  in  what  we  have  already  proved  in  the chapters on Creation and Providence-(1) That God overrules the sins of his creatures for good. (2) That the chief end of all God's purposes and works is the manifestation of his own glory.

## SECTION 2:
> BY this sin they fell from their original righteousness, and  communion  with  God,(3)  and  so  became  dead  in  sin,(4)  and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body.(5)
>
> (3)  Gen.  3:6-8;  Eccl.  7:29;  Rom.  3:23.  (4)  Gen.  2:17;  Eph.  2:1.  (5) Titus 1:15; Gen. 6:5; Jer. 17:9; Rom. 3:10-18.

Naturally,  man  depends  upon  the  providential  sustaining  power  of God;  but  as  a  moral  and  religious  being  he  depends  upon  the intimate and loving communion of God's Spirit for spiritual life and right moral action. Therefore-

- 1. By this sin man must have instantly been cut off from this loving communion  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  This  must  have  been  under  any constitution  the  natural  effect  of  sin.  And  under  that  covenant relation  into which  man  had  been  introduced  in  the  gracious providence of God at his creation,  it  was  specifically  provided  that the  commission of the forbidden act should be followed by instant death;  that  is,  instant  penal  exclusion  from  the  source  of  all  moral and spiritual life. See ch. 7., s. 2. Gen. 2:17. Therefore-
- 2.  The  principle  of  spiritual  life  having  been  withdrawn  as  the punishment of that first sin, our first parents must have instantly lost their original righteousness; their allegiance had been violated, their faith broken, and love could no longer dominate in their hearts. And thus-
- 3. They must have at once become dead in sins and wholly corrupt. And 4. This corruption must have extended to all the faculties. It is not meant that Adam by this one sin became as bad as a man can be, or as he himself became afterward. But as death at the heart involves death in all the members, so the favor and communion of God being lost, **(1)** Original righteousness, the necessary principle of obedience, is  lost.  **(2)**  Adam's  apostasy  from  God  is  complete.  God  demands perfect  obedience,  and  Adam  is  now  a  rebel.  **(3)**  A  schism  was introduced  into  his  soul.  Conscience  uttered  its  condemning  voice. This  leads  to  fear,  distrust,  prevarication,  and  an  endless  series  of sins. **(4)** Thus his entire nature became depraved. The will being at war  with  the  conscience,  the  understanding  became  darkened,  the passions roused, the affections alienated, the conscience calloused or deceitful,  the  appetites  of  the  body  inordinate,  and  its  members instruments of unrighteousness.

## SECTION 3:
> THEY being the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was  imputed,(6)  and  the  same  death  in  sin  and  corrupted  nature conveyed  to  all  their  posterity,  descending  from  them  by  ordinary generations.(7)

## SECTION 4:
> FROM this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good,(8) and wholly inclined to all evil,(9) do proceed all actual transgressions.(10)

> (6)  Gen.  1:27,28;  2:16,17;  Acts  17:26;  Rom.  5:12,  15-19;  1  Cor. 15:21,22,45,49. (7) Ps. 51:5; Gen. 5:3; Job 14:4; 15:14. (8) Rom. 5:6; 8:7;  7:18;  Col.  1:21.  (9)  Gen.  6:5;  8:21;  Rom.  3:10-12.  (10)  James 1:14,15; Eph. 2:2,3; Matt. 15:19.

### 1.
Adam was both the natural and federal head of all mankind, Christ of course excepted.

The  nature  and  provisions  of  that  covenant  which  God  made  with Adam will  be  considered  in  its  appropriate  place,  ch.  8:,  s.  2.  The point  which  demands  our  attention  here  is,  that  in  making  that covenant with Adam, God constituted him and treated with him as the moral representative of all his natural descendants. This is very explicitly taught in our Standards. Conf. Faith, ch. 7:, s. 2: "The first covenant made with man was a covenant of works, wherein life was promised  to  Adam,  and  in  him  to  his  posterity,  upon  condition  of perfect and personal obedience." L. Cat., q. 22: "The covenant being made with Adam as a public person, not for himself only, but for his posterity, all mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first transgression." S. Cat., q. 16: "The covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for  his  posterity,  all  mankind,  descending  from  him  by  ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first transgression."

As we have seen, it is God's general method of dealing with newlycreated moral agents to create them holy, yet capable of falling, and then  to  put  them  on  trial  for  a  time,  making  their  confirmed  and permanent moral character and destiny to depend upon their own action. In the case of the angels, who  were  severally  created independent  individuals,  they  appear to have  stood  their trial severally, each  in his own  person.  Some  fell,  and some  were confirmed in holiness and blessedness. But in the case of a race to be propagated  in  a  series,  each  individual  to  come  into  existence  an unintelligent infant, thence to develop gradually into moral agency, like  that  of  mankind,  it  is  obvious  that  one  of  three  plans  must  be adopted:  (1)  The  whole  race  must  be  confirmed  in  holiness  and happiness without any probation. (2) Each individual must stand his own probation while groping his way from infancy into childhood. (3) Or the whole race must have their trial in their natural head and root, Adam. We are not in a condition to judge of the propriety of the first of these plans, but we  can easily see that the third is incomparably  more  rational, righteous, and merciful than the second.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  God  did  make  our  character  and  destiny  to depend upon the conduct of Adam in his probation. This was right(1) Because, as sovereign Creator, and infinitely wise, righteous, and merciful Guardian of the interests of all his creatures, it seemed right in his eyes. (2) Because it was more to our advantage than any other plan that can be imagined. Adam was most advantageously constituted and circumstanced in order that he should stand the trial safely. Incalculable benefits as well as risks were suspended upon his action. If he had maintained his integrity for a limited period, all his race would have been born into an indefeasible inheritance of glory. (3)  Because  the  covenant  headship  of  Adam  is  part  of  a  glorious constitution  which  culminates  in  the  covenant  headship  of  Christ. That Adam was, as our Standards say, "a public person," and that the covenant  was  made  with  him  "not  for  himself  only,  but  for  his posterity," is proved from the facts-

- **(1)** That he was called by a generic name, Adam-the Man.
- **(2)** That everything that God commanded, promised, or threatened him  related  to  his  descendants  as  much  as  to  himself  personally. Thus,  "obedience,"  "a  cursed  earth,"  "the  reign  of  death,"  "painful child-bearing," and the subsequent promise of redemption through the Seed of the woman, were spoken with reference to us as much as with reference to our first parents.

- **(3)**  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  very  penalty  denounced  and  executed upon Adam has been executed upon all of his descendants from birth upward. All are born spiritually dead, "by nature children of wrath." Also, from the fact that-
### 2.
The  guilt  of  that  sin  is  imputed  to  all  his  descendants,  and  the penalty executed upon them at their birth.

By  the  word  "guilt"  is  meant,  not  the  personal  disposition  which prompted the act, nor the personal moral pollution which resulted from it, but simply the just liability to the punishment which that sin deserved.

By the term "impute" is meant to lay to the charge or credit of any one as a ground of judicial punishment or justification. This is the sense in which the phrase "to impute sin" or "righteousness" is used in  the  Bible.  "David  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man  unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works, . . . to whom the Lord  will  not  impute  sin.  .  .  .  Faith  was  imputed  to  Abraham  for righteousness."  (Rom.  4:3-9.)  "God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them."  (2 Cor. 5:19.)

Our Standards expressly affirm that the "guilt," or just liability to the penalty, of Adam's apostatizing act is by God "imputed," or judicially laid to the charge of each of his natural descendants. Conf. Faith, ch. 6., s. 3: "This sin was imputed . . . to all their posterity." In L. q. 25, and S.  Cat.,  q.  18,  "the  sinfulness  of  that  estate  into  which  the  fall brought  mankind"  is  declared  to  include  each  of  the  following elements:

"(1) The guilt of Adam's first sin; (2) The want of original righteousness;  (3)  The  corruption  of  his  whole  nature,  which  is commonly called original sin; together with all actual transgressions which proceed from it." The reason which our Standards give for this judicial  charging  the  punishableness  of  Adam's  first  sin  to  all  his posterity is, that they really "sinned in him in his first transgression" (L. Cat., q. 22; S. Cat., q. 16); since he acted as "a public person," and the covenant was made with him "not for himself only, but for his posterity" (L. Cat., q. 22; S. Cat., q. 16). That is, Adam, by a divine constitution, so represented and acted for all his posterity that they are fairly responsible for his action, and are worthy of punishment on account of it. Since their destiny, as well as his own, was suspended upon Adam's action, since they were justly to have part in his reward if he was faithful, so they justly have part in his punishment for his unfaithfulness.

The  Articles  of  the  Synod  of  Dort  affirm  that  moral  depravity  is inflicted  upon  all  the  descendants  of  Adam  at  birth  "by  the  just judgment  of  God."  Ch.  3.,  s.  2.  This  is  also  explicitly  taught  in Scripture. Paul teaches, in Rom. 5:12-21, (1) That the law of death, spiritual and physical, under which we are born, is a consequent of Adam's  public  disobedience;  and  (2)  That  it  is  a  "judgment,"  a "condemnation"-that is, a penal consequent of Adam's sin: "Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation." (3) That the punishment of Adam's sin comes upon us upon the same principle upon which the righteousness of Christ is charged to the account of those who believe on him: "Therefore as by the  offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life." But the righteousness of Christ is imputed without works (Rom. 4:6), before, and as the necessary condition of, good dispositions or actions upon our part. So the guilt of Adam's sin is  imputed  to  his  posterity  without  personal  works  of  their  own, before, and as the cause of, their loss of original righteousness and acquisition of original sin. The  only Sin of Adam  which  the Confession says was "imputed" to his descendants, and the Sin of his which they assert we "sinned in him," was his first sin or apostatizing act. The manifest reason of this is that he represented us, and we are responsible  for  him  only  in  his  trial  for  character  and  destiny.  His first sin, by incurring the penalty, necessarily and instantly closed his probation and ours, and he immediately became a private person.

The penalty denounced upon Adam and those whom he represented in his trial was the judicial withdrawment of the life-giving influences of the Holy Ghost, and the inevitable consequent moral and physical death. Hence every newly-created soul comes into existence judicially excluded from the life-giving influences of the Holy Spirit, and  hence  morally  and  spiritually  dead.  Other  actual  sins  and miseries  in  time  occur  as  the  natural  consequence  of  this  birthpunishment.  But  the  Scriptures  and  our  own  consciousness  also affirm  that  these  actual  transgressions  are  our  own  personal  sins, and that all the temporal and eternal punishments we suffer are on account of them.

### 3.
It hence follows, that if the guilt of Adam's apostasy is charged to all his natural descendants, and  the Holy  Spirit consequently judicially  withdrawn  from  them  at  their  birth,  the  same  moral corruption which ensued from the same cause in the case of our first parents must, from their birth, follow in their descendants also. Of this "corrupted nature" this section proceeds to say-

### 4.
That by it "we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil"; and,-

### 5.
"From  this  original  corruption"  of  nature  "proceed  all  actual transgressions."  It  is  here  taught  (1)  That  all  men  sin  from  the commencement of moral agency. (2) That back of this their nature is morally corrupt, indisposed to all good, and inclined to all evil. (3) That this moral corruption is so radical and inveterate that men are by nature "disabled" with respect to right moral action. (4) That this condition  is  innate  from  birth  and  by  nature  this  representation agrees with universal experience. All the children of men, of all ages, nations, and circumstances, and how ever educated, invariably sin as soon as they become capable of moral action. A universal fact must have  a  cause  universally  present.  This  can  only  be  found  in  the common depravity of our nature.

- **(2)** With all the teachings of Scripture. **(a)** It declares that all men are sinners. (Rom. 1, 2, and 3:1-19.) **(b)** That sinful actions proceed from sinful  hearts  or  dispositions.  (Matt.  15:19;  Luke  6:43-45.)  **(c)**  That the  disposition  which  prompts  to  sinful  action  is  "sin,"  a  moral corruption. (Rom. 6:12,14,17; 7:5-17; Gal. 5:17,24; Eph. 4:18,19.) **(d)**  That  this  corruption  involves  moral  and  spiritual  blindness  of mind, as well as hardness of heart and vile affections. (1 Cor. 2:14,15; Eph. 4:18.) **(e)** That this moral corruption and prevailing tendency to sin is in our nature from birth. (Ps. 51:5; Eph. 2:3; John 3:6.) **(f)** That men in their  natural  state  are  "dead"  in  trespasses  and  sins.  (Eph. 2:1; John 3:4,5.) And **(g)** That consequently they can be restored by no "change of purpose" nor "moral reformation" upon their part, but only  by  an  act  of  almighty  power  called  "a  new  birth"  "a  new creation,"  "a  begetting,"  "a  quickening  from  the  dead."  (Eph.  4:24, 2:5,10; John 3:3; 1 John 5:18.)

What the Confession teaches of man's sinful inability to do right, in consequence of the depravity of his nature, will be considered under its appropriate head, in Chapter 9.

## SECTION 5:
> THIS corruption of nature, during this life, remain in those  that  are  regenerated;(11)  and  although  it  be  through  Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both itself, and all the motions thereof, are truly and properly sin.(12)

## SECTION 6:
> EVERY  sin, both original and actual. being a transgression  of  the  righteous  law  of  God,  and  contrary  thereunto, (13) doth, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner,(14) whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God,(15) and curse of the law,(16)

and  so  made  subject  to  death,(17)  with  all  miseries  spiritual,(18) temporal,(19) and eternal.(20)

- (11) 1 John 1:8,10; Rom. 7:14,17,18,23; James 3:2; Prov. 20:9; Eccl. 7:20. (12) Rom. 7:5,7,8, 25; Gal. 5:17. (13) 1 John 3:4. (14) Rom. 2:15; 3:9,19. (15) Eph. 2:3. (16) Gal. 3:10. (17) Rom. 6:23. (18) Eph. 4:18. (19) Rom. 8:20; Lam. 3:39. (20) Matt. 25:41; 2 Thess. 1:9.

These sections speak of the corruption that remains in the regenerated,  and  of  the  guilt  or  just  liability  to  punishment  which attaches to all sin, and of the punishments God inflicts upon it.

- I. Of the first, it is taught-
- 1. Original sin, or innate moral corruption, remains in the regenerate as long as they live.
- 2. That it is pardoned through the merits of Christ.
- 3.  That it  is  gradually  brought into subjection and mortified by the work of the Holy Spirit in sanctification.
- 4.  That  nevertheless  all  that  remains  of  it,  and  all  the  feelings  and actions to which it prompts, are truly of the nature of sin.

All  of  these  points  will  be  more  appropriately  treated  under  the heads  of  Justification,  Conf.  Faith,  ch.  11.;  and  of  Sanctification, Conf. Faith, ch. 13.

- II. Of the second, it is taught-
- 1. Original sin-that is, the nature corrupt tendencies and affections of the soul- is truly a violation of God's law as actual transgression.

The Catechisms. (L. Cat., q. 24; S. Cat., q. 14) define sin to be "any want of conformity unto, or transgression of, the law of God."

This corresponds exactly with what the apostle teaches (1 John 3:4): "Sin is anouia "-any discrepancy of the creature or his acts with God's law. This is evident-

- (1)  Because  from  its  very  essence  the  moral  law  demands  absolute perfection of character and disposition as well as action. Whatever is right is essentially obligatory; whatever is wrong is essentially worthy of condemnation. God requires us to be holy as well as to act rightly. God proclaims himself as "he which searcheth the reins and hearts." (Rev. 2:23.)
- (2)  The  native  corrupt  tendencies  which  constitute  original  sin  are called  sin  in  Scripture.  Sin  and  its  lusts  are  said  to  "reign"  in  our mortal bodies; sin is said to have "dominion"; the unregenerate are called "the servants of sin." (Rom. 6:12-17; 7:5-17; Gal. 5:17,24; Eph. 4:18,19.)
- (3)  God  condemns  men  for  their  corrupt  natural  dispositions,  for their  hardness  of  heart,  spiritual  blindness  of  mind.  (Mark  16:14; Eph. 2:3.)
- (4) In all genuine conviction of sin, the great burden of pollution and guilt is felt to consist not in what we have done, but in what we areour permanent moral condition rather than our actual transgressions.  The  great  cry  is  to  be  forgiven  and  delivered  from "the wicked heart of unbelief," "deadness to divine things, alienation from God as a permanent habit of soul." "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" (Rom. 7:24; Ps. 51:5,6.)
- 2.  It  hence  necessarily  follows  that  original  sin,  as  well  as  actual transgressions,  deserves  the  curse  of  the  law.  Everything  which  is condemned by the law is under its curse. This is evident From what we learned of the justice of God in ch. 2., ss. 1, 2. (2) From the fact that  it  is  the  universal  judgment  of  men  that  sin  is  intrinsically  illdesert-that all that ought not to be is worthy of condemnation. (3)

From the fact that the Holy Ghost, in convincing men of sin, always likewise convinces them of a judgment. (John 16:8.) (4) Men are "by nature children of wrath." Eph. 2:3. (5) Even infants are redeemed by Christ. And in their case, as in all others, he redeemed them from the curse of the law, being made a curse for them. (Gal. 3:13.)

- 3. Consequently, the sinner guilty of original and of actual transgressions  is,  unless  grace  intervene,  made  subject  to  death, including temporal, spiritual, and eternal miseries.

The temporal miseries indicted upon men, in the just displeasure of God for their sin, are summarily set forth in the Larger Catechism, q. 28,  as  "the  curse  of  God  upon  the  creatures  for  our  sakes,  and  all other evils that befall us in our bodies, names, estates, relations, and employments;  together  with  death  itself."  This,  of  course,  applies only to the still unbelieving, unjustified sinner; for all the tribulations which are suffered by the justified believer in this life are chastisements, designed for his benefit, and  expressive of his heavenly  Father's  love-not  penal  evils,  expressive  of  his  wrath  and unsatisfied justice.

The spiritual miseries which sin brings upon the unforgiven in this life  are  set  forth  "as  blindness  of  mind,  a  reprobate  sense,  strong delusions, hardness of heart, horror of conscience, and vile affections."  )Eph.  4:18;  Rom.  1:28;  2  Thess.  2:11;  Rom.  2:5;  Isa. 33:14; Gen. 4:13; Matt. 27:4; Rom. 1:26; L. Cat., q. 28.)

The eternal miseries which are consequent upon unforgiven sin are set forth as "everlasting separation from the comfortable presence of God, and most  grievous torments in soul and body, without intermission, in hell-fire forever." (2 Thess. 1:9; Mark 9:43,44,46,48; Luke 16:24.)

## QUESTIONS

- 1. What is the first proposition taught in the first section?
- 2. What is the second proposition there taught?
- 3. What is the third?
- 4. What is the fourth?
- 5. What is the fifth?
- 6.  What  appears  to  be  God's  general  plan  of  dealing  with  all  newcreated moral agents?
- 7. With what two orders of beings has he so dealt?
- 8.  What  was  made  the  "test"  in  the  case  of  man?  and  why  was  it admirably fitted for that purpose?
- 9. What appears to have been the nature of the sin committed by our first parents?
- 10.  What  is  the  first  element  of  mystery  involved  in  the  "origin  of sin"?
- 11. Why is it difficult to conceive how a holy being can begin to sin?
- 12.  In  what  respects  did  Adam's  state  as  a  moral  agent  differ  from ours?
- 13. Why cannot a sinful agent originate a holy volition?
- 14. Is sin in its origin a positive disposition or a defect?
- 15.  What  appear  to  have  been  the  motives  influencing  our  first parents?
- 16. To whose action is the true origin of sin to be referred?
- 34. In what sections and in what words do our Standards explicitly teach  that  in  the  covenant  of  works  Adam  represented  all  his descendants?
- 35. What  three  plans  were  possible  with  regard  to  the  moral probation of the individual member of the human family?
- 36. Show why the plan of giving us our probation in Adam's was both wise and benevolent.
- 37. Prove the fact that Adam was our federal representative.
- 38. What is the precise sense in which our Standards use the term "guilt"?
- 39. In what sense do the use the term "to impute"?
- 40. In what sections and in what words do our Standards affirm that the guilt of Adam's first sin is charged to the account of his children?
- 41. What reason do they assign for this imputation of his sin to us?
- 42. Prove from the Scriptures that Adam's sin is so imputed.
- 43. Why is Adam's first sin alone imputed?
- 44. How is that sin punished in us?
- 45. What is the necessary effect of that punishment?
- 46.  What  do  these  sections  teach  as  to  the  moral  state  of  man  by nature?
- 47. What are the several points involved in their teaching?
- 48.  Prove  that  the  doctrine  here  taught  agrees  with  the  universal experience of men.
- 49. State and prove the several points taught in Scripture as to the nature, extent and time of commencement of human depravity.
- 50. What subjects are treated of in the fifth and sixth sections?
- 51. What is taught as to the continuance and character of corruption in the regenerate?
- 52. Prove that the innate and permanent tendency of the soul to sin is as truly a violation of God's law as actual transgression.
- 53.  Prove  that  this  "tendency  to  sin"  and  actual  transgression  are alike worthy of punishment.
- 54. What temporal miseries are inflicted because of sin?
- 55.  What  relation  do  temporal  afflictions  sustain  to  the  justified believer?
- 56. What spiritual miseries are inflicted because of sin?
- 57. What eternal miseries are inflicted on the same account?

| 17. What is the second element of mystery in the origin of sin?                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 18. Prove that Adam's sin was permissively embraced in the divine decrees.                                       |
| 19. Prove that God did neither cause nor approve it.                                                             |
| 20. Prove that God purposed to order it for his own glory.                                                       |
| 21. What is the first proposition taught in the second section?                                                  |
| 22. What is the second proposition there taught?                                                                 |
| 23. What is the third?                                                                                           |
| 24. What is the fourth?                                                                                          |
| 25. Upon what does the human soul depend for spiritual life?                                                     |
| 26. Show that the life-sustaining influences of the Holy Spirit were immediately withdrawn in punishment of sin. |
| 27. What was the immediate consequence of that withdrawal?                                                       |
| 28. To what extent was the moral and spiritual character of our first parents affected?                          |
| 29. What is the first proposition taught in the third and fourth sections?                                       |
| 30. What is the second proposition there taught?                                                                 |
| 31. What is the third?                                                                                           |
| 32. What is the fourth?                                                                                          |
| 33. What is the fifth?                                                                                           |
